how are you um i feel like i'm watching or waiting
for popcorn like you know there's like the last few kern
els that might pop or might not but like do i open
the microwave or not um but anyway it looks like we have
some critical mass so i'm very excited to be here with
everyone here in this room today um because i think we are
building the future of community and collective software and that is pretty
awesome my name is mosh lee i'm currently the director
of the ipfs foundation um and today i want to talk
about feature product business the framework for building and enduring at proto
ecosystem so uh who here has heard of ipfs all right
cool um we make a constellation of tools and protocols for content
addressing some of them like ipld and dazzle are building
blocks for at proto so if you're building on at proto
you might be using this already but we've also been evolving
the protocol to be more modular more web friendly um in projects
like dazzle which is a simple and more adoptable subset
of ipfs i think robin is in the room who
kind of masterminded that web tiles which are safe composable
modules for web apps meta disco which is a system for science
metadata publishing there was a short talk about that tomorrow afternoon at
4 40 and then um the cid congress is our monthly
virtual series where we get together a lot of the um nerd
s and friends uh evolving protocols for content addressing so come join
us that's on luma i'll make sure that link
is out in the world for you to find but we we
love to um meet new friends and learn about your projects and
evolve these protocols together so uh zooming out a bit uh my
talk today is not really about my work at the ipfs
foundation quite so directly um i'm here because it i've
been on many sides of the table um i built google forms
i founded a gov tech company i sold it i watched
it get sold again to private equity uh i ran dev teams
developer programs and grants at protocol labs and ipfs um i
think totaling 25 million dollars in grant programs um i'm
also a a small time angel investor so this talk is really
what i wish someone had told me and the conversations i wish
i'd had there are no prescriptions here there are no
right answers but i think there's a lot of information we
don't talk about when we're busy talking about building software
um and i'm happy to make this interactive so i'll
pause every once in a while for questions or hands up or
just shout out if you're nice and i'll make sure
we have time at the end as well all right this talk
is going to be in three parts the framework our at proto
landscape and some talk about funding models the first thing is the
title of the talk feature product business and uh so in in
a short phrase a feature is something that solves one problem often
delightfully well i'll give some examples soon a product is
a bundle of features solving a clear job it might help you
solve what you're sitting down at your desk to do this
morning or what you're setting out in the world to do
and a business is an organism sometimes one product sometimes a collection
of products or features that can outlive itself has competitive advantages
has a team that can be resilient to shocks exogenous shocks
and the reason i chose this analogy rock paper scissors is that
there's no one winner right all all of these can succeed
depending on the context the game you're playing you know the
the um what what other players are putting out there um but
they are very different and when you mistake one for the other
i think that's when you enter a world of pain so
um a feature like i said it solves one problem and i
think one big test of a feature is can you plausibly
think it'll become a pain in someone else's app or
someone else's project right if this is something portable um there
's a very low barrier to entry there's no onboarding
often no account required no logins no subscription it just does
one thing well and stops and it's beautiful and thank you
very much you've solved my problem um the downside it's
really easy to copy or absorb um and if people really love
a feature you might get confused into thinking there's a business
i made that mistake i'll talk about that more later um
and i think really the worst case is building a feature and
having a lot of people love it um but everyone assumes that
love is your business model and that'll keep keep the ship
afloat um okay so some features we love just some
examples clippy right clippy is a feature easily identifiable
it tries so hard to do its job um you know we
we actually sort of replay i think clippy was onto something
uh because now we have autocomplete which is kind of
you know the same thing but uh less um less less of
a guilt trip i think when you ignore it um view source
is maybe my favorite feature of the whole web i'm a
millennial this is how i learned to code um it is
in every single browser it's really easy to copy across browsers
but it's an incredibly powerful feature so i'm not talking
about a hobby project when i talk about features but i'm
saying that um this is you know it it uh it's
more powerful when it's integrated into something bigger um curl is
another example and quite different um it powers so much of the
internet's data transfer but it's been maintained by one person
for decades um it's not a business it doesn't need
to be and the boundaries are very very clearly defined um a
lot of developer tools like here's one example just a um
a cid lookup um it you paste the cid
you get it decoded you get you know version codec
multi-hash um a lot of developer tools are like
this they're their features um they do one job they do
it really fast you get in get out um and the last
one which i'll talk about because i have some personal experience
with is is google forms um uh that is something i created
a long time ago now in internet years and it's still
around and i'll talk a little bit about why it's
still around but there are also features that didn't make it
that were really fun but um didn't really survive does anyone
remember vine like short form looping videos like the next successor
to i don't know social media and everyone else just copied
it because it turns out that that's just a format they
didn't really have anything else unique around it um to make
it more powerful or more sticky or or build deeper relationships um
another one i think and it's still around in some forms
but rss right rss was an incredibly capable powerful capability
still is um podcasts use it but but uh for a long
time this really transformed how people consume the internet you could build
your own rss feeds you know subscribe to subscribe to um
publishers or individuals or channels um and google reader was the product
alongside it google reader didn't have a business model and so
we i think we lost a lot of what we could do
with rss um let's talk about products a little bit
and then we'll come back to some examples that are blurry
and straddle the lines um products are bundles of
features that solve a clear use case the big test is would
people be upset if it shut down tomorrow a lot of atmosphere
apps are products including our favorite blue sky um and uh there
are a lot of other builders in this room building some incredible
apps on top of this uh this ecosystem so it solves a
bigger problem not just a piece of one right it solves a
problem end to end uh peter yesterday was using the phrase
jobs to be done so it really solves like a big job
to be done um and they really build loyalty not just usage
because they can they can get integrated more deeply into your workflows
um products are pretty expensive to build once you launch a product
every user wants a different feature they hassle you about it they
email you they skeet you and you really and uh you
can't just stop and maintain what you have you have to
keep growing and evolving it to um to to feed that hungry
beast so um you know it's quite a bit of software
to build and and you want to make sure that it's
worth it if you do that um here are some products we
love that use very different models for sustainability wikipedia is
a free encyclopedia anyone can edit it's maintained entirely
by volunteers but the hard costs are funded by donations um this
is maybe the most successful public good on the internet and it
has survived quite a lot of assault um homebrew is
another example um homebrew is a package manager for mac
it's um maintained by volunteers used by millions uh but actually
just a few years ago one of the lead maintainers of
homebrew um started a company called workbrew because
people kept trying to make feature requests of homebrew that
that weren't appropriate for an open source project they were more
about tying into an enterprise environment and they said all right well
we'll just give you a different universe that can layer on
top of homebrew that'll be the business model and
it'll also fund our our work on homebrew so
um that's a very popular product i think and pinboard
is another example um this is another single developer project and product
um they've had a paid model from day one um but
pinboard is a very fast no-nonsense bookmark
ing website it has survived it has outlived a lot of
other ideas and projects for bookmarking and saving information and
uh part of it is that being a single developer single um
single maintainer you can be really nimble so you can
make opinionated choices you kind of live in as a user
you live inside that person's brain and uh and that can
build really strong relationships it you know it's a it's
a way to create software that that really makes sense holistically
you don't have a committee like arguing or disagreeing with
each other about um certain feature choices right and and so that
's kind of the magic of of uh single founder or very
small team software um and so these are very very different models
for products um but they are all products right um but products
are also uh precarious because uh we can lose them
so dark sky was a weather did anyone use dark sky yeah
amazing weather app the most beautiful visualizations like wonderful interface languages
um really accurate data um but it was acquired by apple shut
it down so uh by dark sky r.
i.
p um uh google reader is another one um with a ton
of devoted users and for a very long time um it was
funded because of google's overarching thesis that more internet time is
more better for them right and we know how that's turning
out um but eventually they uh began to zoom magnify fine
glass in on um specific projects and google reader uh sadly didn
't make the cut and so they lost interest and killed it
and along with it i think a lot of the um a
lot of the usage and uh power behind rss and i
think that's kind of what would happen right the the relationship
of blue sky right now is still pretty dominant in the atmosphere
so if we lost blue sky the app it would have uh
pretty negative effects on the atmosphere um and the sooner we can
build against that a build a more resilient ecosystem the better um
odio is a fascinating one and i think a really interesting
story for this particular audience um odio was a podcasting
startup in 2004 so in 2004 there weren'tiphones like
people weren't walking around with computers and audio and video files
in their pocket very much um and so they just got there
a little too soon and they quit when itunes also launched
podcasting it turns out that podcasting is actually um a
you know big enough to support multiple startups multiple players there but
they they quit too soon they weren't really focused on creator
or um or publisher experiences or or any help with um quality
production monetization anything around the ecosystem i think they just saw
that all right apple made a player i guess we're done
here they started running hackathons and out of that hack
athon some one of those hackathons came twitter so um
yeah that is that is odio for uh for anyone who
doesn't remember um and there are also products that we really
love um in extremely obscure niches and i think uh many
of us in this room are extremely online we use social media
we connect to others we meet strangers online and then we get
together with them in person sometimes we even start companies with them
without having met in person um this is a weird way to
live most people don't live like that and many businesses industries
sectors um operate in these um uh very specific niches and
if you can deeply understand that niche if you either come from
it or partner with one or you spend many years maybe providing
services to to these industries um that is an an incredible unfair
advantage that you can build and i think we underestimate these nich
es so here's just some examples um zotero i
haven't used it myself but uh this is a freem
ium reference manager for researchers and academics um it's a 19
year old project funded by individual and institutional subscriptions um so to
use it basic uh the basic mode is free but if you
want to actually store all the documents that you're collecting and
referencing you pay and you can pay by individual you or you
can have you know the whole chemistry department at your university or
research institution subscribe so five million dollars a year revenue has been
enough to keep it going for almost 20 years arc gis
is another one a kind of an elephant in the room this
is a 50 year old company like that is pretty incredible they
've built such a mode they're not cooperative at all but
they've done a lot to advance the state of gis
and this is a 5.
5 billion dollar valuation company um some more obscure ones that i
think are fascinating because they're much bigger than you think um
i don't know if anyone has little kids here but um
in the past few years all the daycares and preschool
s started using apps to communicate with parents that's kind of
a baseline expectation now um and most of them are really sloppy
with privacy there's only one that gets a lot of the
user experience and the privacy um the data security right that's
bright wheel i don't think users are choosing it or the
like business owners are choosing it for privacy but it's really
nice that it's bundled along with the nicest customer experience
um because they started with a 600 000 investment from shark tank
um and are currently at a 600 million dollar valuation preschools
and daycares right so uh this is a niche i
don't think many vcs are really talking about but uh
it's very real to our economy it's really real to
parents um and another one is viva i had never heard
of it before i was doing research for this presentation um it
's software for managing pharmaceutical sales and clinical trials so you can
imagine like the data burden the compliance burden is tremendous um the
the used to be that the consequences for bucking up were
huge um and so it's important enough and useful enough that
people are going to pay a lot um to have the problem
solved for them and the team that that was able to understand
this vertical well enough um uh uh you know is is doing
extremely well so um it's not just data there but they
're also managing communications and participant recruitment so there's some element
of community there um and there are also big communities of patients
actually sharing um their experiences especially in rare disease so um these
are prod and i say these are products but they're actually
all businesses um because they have a deep deep relationship um and
very resilient relationship with their customer base or user base they've
built big enough teams they've figured out some kind of revenue
model whether it's you know a spectrum of freemium
to expensive selling to individuals selling to organizations um but you know
they're they're actually all businesses and features can also become
businesses so this is not a linear path um calendly and
stripe i think are exactly you know calendly all the calend
ly does is schedule your freaking meetings um and yet people pay
for it because they do this one thing extremely well and they
integrate with everything else in your workflow right so you can build
a business on a feature if you exploit a small wedge and
and you just really crush that wedge um there uh there's
another pattern for features going into businesses zapier is just six
thousand integrations on a marketplace right um none of that is
cutting edge they've just reduced all of the friction of comp
osing your different services and apps and data sources um mailch
imp is the same thing they've got a lot of templates
and and over the value is is accruing over time
so the first template is just a product the hundredth becomes
a moat you know the the 60 millionth template you
start to build some advantages um by making this very very long
tail usable um and another really common one is just packaging internal
infrastructure you you build some dev tools to solve your own problem
you realize everyone else needs it and so you upgrade it um
and expand it so so others can use it too so um
yeah i kept throwing the word around uh business business business can
also mean a non-profit business right at the end of
the day it's something that that um that sustained itself over
the long term um uh i talk about the team a lot
because um it needs to be able to survive exogenous shocks
um it has to have a moat and i think this
is possibly controversial here right it's an uncomfortable thing to grapp
le with like there are many ways to build moats there
you know you can um have some extremely anti-compet
itive practices use proprietary data formats um extremely aggressive contracts those are
all ways to build moats other ways to build moats
if you think about it um are you know instagram took the
route of we're just going to make this a happy beautiful
place for everyone and so their moat was really in the
accretion of small content moderation decisions over time they built
a reputation for creators as a place where harassment would be slightly
less than other places in the wild i think this is evolving
for sure right but but um their moat was their community
and i think um uh reddit uh has been doing surprisingly
well as well and i think that's also because they give
each community the tools to manage their own communities create their own
third spaces um set their own rules um and so the mo
at can be the friction of getting a lot of people to
move it doesn't have to be um strictly something that's
aggressive and and and and anti you know um anti-tr
ust right um i think the the biggest challenge with a business
is it requires developers to get good at things that many of
us are bad at or just really not interested in distribution pricing
support sales um i joked yesterday that like we're we
're gonna have to learn to pick up the phone probably half
us and answer unknown numbers i'm really sorry but but some
people are gonna have to do that um and it's really
easy to make a mistake where a product and some revenue can
start to look like a business and it it does fine for
a while you get some base hits um but it doesn't
have that enduring value so i want to talk about some examples
um this is the time i built a feature um that got
confused for products really a feature um so uh i uh invented
google forms um when i was a designer on the dry you
know google docs team and we kept hearing that people were struggling
with permissions on sheets like who gets to be an editor who
gets to be a commenter people were overwriting each other
in the cells when you had too many people using it and
at the end of the day it turns out most people don
't need to edit cells they just need to submit their one
row of information and then you've got your you know two
or five or ten information managers that actually need to control the
structure behind it and so dumping data directly into sheets was the
superpower right we obviously made it as beautiful as we could in
2001 i don't even remember what year this is a very
long time ago air table is a lot more beautiful now but
i think the enduring value here is that we dump the data
directly into sheets and anyone who manages data is going to probably
say like i want the easiest interface for data manipulation and and
um an organization afterward so that's the product the forms plus
sheets is the product and then g suite where you wrap in
calendar mail and then you you know sell that entire subscription to
an organization that's the business right so you can build something
that everyone knows and loves and uses a ton um but it
might still be a feature so be careful about that um and
then another time i built a product and i built the beginning
of a business but we sold it to a much stronger business
and you could really feel the difference in the end of the
year um and so this was uh 2012 like obama was
in office i think we all thought technology could fix government um
but governments were also holding public meetings that no one was going
to and so we built a two-way text message chat
bot you could program it um uh with you know different interactive
workflows um when we launched it because of the very strong code
for america network we got 240 inbounds in a
week you know they said we need this we need this and
so we thought that was our business right and and it really
it was it was the beginning of a business night invested half
of our team switched to sales i started picking up every unknown
number that called my phone um i you know learned about uh
pnls talked to lawyers contracts all this stuff um and
we did get pretty good at local government sales so city and
county and state level sales we were not qualified to sell to
government into federal which is where the majority of the customer bases
um and so we um i think this started with some rese
ller licenses so they a bigger company which had been around for
14 years they were the send grid of government email it's
called gov delivery at the time um and they were the
ones sending out hey you have 48 hours left to register for
health insurance um uh to uh most of americans um they
had 97 of the state and federal agencies as their customers they
bundled that into um bundled our product into an add
-on they immediately started selling it for a lot more than
we were especially at the high end um and then we were
kind of the expert consultants that came in and helped them figure
out their integrations so um i think you know we got
to close to a million dollar run rate um uh for the
year but it was really palpable when we went on these
ride-alongs like how much of a head start this
other company had in in building their business and i think the
takeaway here is that we you know to survive and really thrive
as a standalone business we probably needed to um one more deeply
integrate into like 311 salesforce all those existing workflows so
we could become part of their system and also go multi-
channel so we were text messaging we were like the the
hot new kids you know um who understood text messaging but we
needed to go come alongside handling 311 calls emails other constitu
ent services to really become like an all-in-one
suite so if we'd wanted to stay independent and continue to
grow that you know we needed um multiple products to bundle into
into a solution okay we're going to start part two any
comments or questions or um stories yes i
always think of these revolutions as a spectrum if we if
we pay attention you know things like air table and zapier
already took the place of a lot of sas software um
i think it's going to be a little bit slower for
these enterprises to adopt right now they're still all stuck on
chat bots and um and mit studies show showed that 95 of
enterprise ai deployments are a waste of money the five that
succeed the five percent that succeed are deeply integrated into workflows and
done by domain experts so if you have the right people um
telling the ais what to do i think there's huge potential
there especially in really constrained environments you know one of my passions
is public sector software and so if you can imagine a crack
team instead of paying like 115 million to mckinsey
being able to manage a much smaller contractor software project on their
own with the help of of coding agents that's really powerful
and i think yes the sas market will really collapse but
there will always be innovators on the edges that understand how
to connect components in a way that the ais don't see
or the big incumbents don't see okay um i think
our at proto landscape in a completely unscientific review it
looks a lot like this right we have a lot of amazing
features we have a lot of fantastic products we have a handful
of businesses solutions that that have real customers it's really fantastic
to see that we have all of these um but this is
lopsided and we've got like a little too heavy
in the first two categories and a little light in the third
um let's see uh jim barksdale from nets
cape has said there's only two ways to make money bund
ling and unbundling um and what he's talking
about is like you know um uh making something easier to access
or or grow by putting pieces together or uh once that gets
too bloated you can unbundle and innovate in
a very specific slice to do something novel and exciting and really
meaningful and powerful and so you know his thesis is that um
our technologies go and our markets go in waves so there's
like great unbundlings and and the great re-
bundlings um uh and and uh ravi metter
wrote an essay that highlighted like the unbundling is
appropriate when you want to disrupt and you want to bundle to
grow i don't know if we're fully on one end
of the spectrum uh the pendulum swing or or other i think
we're somewhere in the middle but just think about it as
as you know ways to evolve what you do um if you
want to do more disruption or more growth right so think about
a customer like nba um we've always said that like
brands are are so hungry to take control of their own customers
and relationships and and and communities right um and what they need
is a managed community experience with moderation at scale they need um
brand safe content controls they need analytics they need video infrastructure they
need um some boring enterprise checklist of like compliance compliance and sl
as and they need a single person to call when something breaks
at halftime we actually have a lot of this in
the atmosphere right we have um community moderation i hear it's
coming um content controls we've got a fetica in the
house we've got some amazing video infrastructure thank you stream place
um so a lot of these parts are here but a brand
or a customer like nba doesn't know how to navigate
this like kelp forest of magical you know um symbiot
ic experiences they they need a help they need it they need
either a tour guide or they need like a um like a
um a blue apron meal kit they just they need some help
right let's get them some help um and uh that help
doesn't have to come from outsiders that can come from cooper
atives or revenue share opportunities or integrations from within the community
um but let's think more about how to uh work together
to bring this this shared streamlined benefit right because today we have
a lot of technical options for folks i think we have a
lot of building blocks um but they're like i said they
're they're um they're kind of like meal kits you
have to cook yourself and not every user is ready to do
that or capable to do that or wants to do that um
but a more interesting one because like the nba is a
little bit aspirational and they are probably incredibly picky and difficult
to land right let's talk about something super boring like i
said i'm kind of obsessed with these niche niche markets right
of experts um the american society of anesthesiologists is
53 000 members in a professional membership org um and they uh
make about 52 million a year in revenue half of that is
membership fees from um from their members the other half is in
educational products and they have a private verified community for credential professionals
you can imagine their education involves a lot of video or interactive
discussions or community building or or knowledge sharing right they have a
ton of compliance they probably have a terrible forum or a lifts
listserv or like really bad conference uh conference websites that we
can do better in the atmosphere and so if we think about
these mid-size customers and what they need it's similar
you know combinations of these building blocks um but but you know
possibly more attainable by us in in the next year before
the next at at comp so we are um at part three
i want to talk a little bit about the model and like
i said there is there is no one winner right we just
want to match our model and align incentives if you have a
feature you can gift it to the world you can charge a
small subscription you can use it to get hired you can fold
it into a product with a product you can sell the thing
using a few different models and with a business you can chase
you know revenue equity strategic investment and i i want to highlight
here yeah oh okay okay are we back on audio streaming
thank you i'll just try to project in the room um
when it comes to funding i hear grants i hear vc
i hear a lot of builders and founders saying i need to
pick a path right i need it's a fork in the
road i need to pick a path and i'm here to
say that there are a lot more models especially outside of tech
inside philanthropic models you have mission locked for-profit models
you have a lot of cooperatives um uh some folks from
the hypha worker cooperative are here some folks from agalia
are partnering with blue sky there are huge properties or billion dollar
cooperatives um look in spain especially this is what d
allas wanted to be but like actually they got beaten to the
punch 50 years ago in spain um uh um there are
concessionary um uh loans and financing available the real estate
sector has done a lot of this um so look into those
uh um in the community and oss there's there's a
few different kinds of models um and then under the capitalist um
box uh there's also you know bootstrap and venture
capital is what we talk about the most strategic investment can be
really interesting um especially as you get started because it's a
smaller player a larger player funding you because you make their business
stronger it can be a gateway to acquisition partnerships revenue sharing models
so i just encourage everyone in this room to think a little
bit bigger you don't have to reinvent your model i'm
especially calling out to the funders in the room to consider
some of these alternative models because um what we're building i
think is more generative than some of the extractive models
we've been talking about but also maybe more creative than just
straight grants um that is it from me i hope everyone in
the room got one thing out of it or laughed one time
um my name is mosh i'm mosh.
bluesky.
social um i would love to you know meet or connect or
talk with anyone else in the room um either at this conference
or online or um on the live stream so thank you very
much and i'm gonna um hand it over to emma
right next time